+++
title = "Performance"
description = "A list of benchmarks that showcase the performance of OpenVAF"
date = 2022-12-01T18:10:00+00:00
updated = 2022-12-01T18:10:00+00:00
draft = false
weight = 400
sort_by = "weight"
template = "docs/page.html"

[extra]
toc = true

+++

# Performance 

The following paragraphs give an overview on OpenVAFs' performance. 
Both compilation and simulation speed are analyzed. 
Comparing the compilation speed of different Verilog-A compilers is straightforward and an equitable comparison
as the compilation process is always the same.
However, comparing the simulation speed of different Verilog-A compilers is more difficult.
Each Verilog-A compiler can only be used with some simulators.
Each simulator implements different convergence 
algorithms, and might perform better under different circumstances. 
We have made the netlists and options as equal as possible, yet it must be stressed 
that comparing simulation performance across different simulators do not allow an equitable comparison
of the output of Verilog-A compilers.

In particular in simulations with commercial simulations, the **license checkout time has been removed** from the run-time. 
As far as possible, writing to the hard-disk has been turned off for reducing the impact of read/write calls that are not of interest here.
For Keysight ADS turning off all IO was not possible and therefore some overhead due to read/write access is still present.
Note that fairly comparing simulators is very difficult due to mismatch in configuration options.

The chosen benchmarks are mostly simple single-transistor benchmarks, so that the
model evaluation code (generated by OpenVAF) is the main bottleneck
instead of other algorithms in the simulator like the sparse matrix solver.
Note that multithreaded model evaluation with OpenMP support was turned off in ngspice for these benchmarks.
A simplified form of OpenMP support was initially implemented for OSDI in ngspice that has some additional overhead
which slows down single-device simulations.
This will be remedied in a future ngspice release.
However, ADMS does not ``
These benchmarks were run on an Intel i7-9750H@2.60GHz with 16 GB of DDR4 RAM and a SSD, if not mentioned otherwise.

## Model Compilation

The model compilation time in seconds is compared between different models and different tools. 
These benchmarks were performed with OpenVAF 22.12.0, XYCE 7.5 and Keysight ADS 512.update2.0. <!-- and Spectre 18.1.077. -->

*Benchmark results (in seconds, less is better):*

|               | PSPv103 | BSIM4 | EKV2.6 | JUNCAP200 |
|---------------|---------|-------|--------|-----------|
| **OpenVAF**   |  3.48   |  6.7  |  0.23  |   0.61    |
| **Xyce ADMS** |  109    |  25.1 |  9.6*  |    16.6   |
| **ADS**       |  33.9   |  27.0 |  2.5   |    5.1    |

|               | HICUM/L2v3.0 | BSIM-SOI 4.6   | BSIM-BULK 107     |
|---------------|--------------|----------------|-------------------|
| **OpenVAF**   |   0.72       |    2.1         |   2.9             |
| **Xyce ADMS** |   22*        |     102.1*     |    -*             |
| **ADS**       |   7.7        |     30.7       |    34.5           |

Model compilation speed can be easily compared across tools.
The benchmarks above show that OpenVAF usually outperforms alternative compilers by a factor of 10.
For models like BSIM4 with a very large number of parameters but (comparatively) small evaluation code,
performance is currently slightly worse than it could be.
This problem is a known limitation and will be addressed in the future.
Nonetheless, OpenVAF still outperforms other compilers by a factor of 4 in this case.

<!-- On machine (2) OpenVAF is not available as it runs on a very old RHEL distro that does not support recent LLVM versions. 
Benchmark results on machine (2):

|               | HICUM/L2v3.0 | PSPv103 | BSIM4 | JUNCAP200 | EKV2.6 | BSIM-SOI 4.6.1 | BSIM-BULK 107.0.0 |
|---------------|--------------|---------|-------|-----------|--------|----------------|-------------------|
| Spectre       |    35.6      |   28.5  | 118.9 |  21.18    |  12.85 | 24.1           |     26.3          |
| ADS           |    30.6      |  128.32 | 111.0 |  25.7     |   9.5  |  120           |     115.16        | -->

**=> OpenVAF compiles around x10 faster than existing tools!**


\* = Xyce `buildxyceplugin` fails:  
  - HICUM/L2: brackets at macro def
  - BSIM-SOI: Custom model v4.5 from Xyce repo
  - BSIM-Bulk: Non-independent initializations and node collapses, could not easily fix
  - EKV: par. range macros, noise sources not working
## Model Evaluation 

### HICUM/L2v4p0 Output Characteristics

The aim of this benchmark is to provide a general overview of Verilog-A performance across multiple different simulators.
As noted in the introduction comparisons between different simulators
are not always meaning full. In particular different simulation configuration and convergence algorithms may
affect the results. Therefore, the results below mostly show that Ngspice can nearly match commercial simulators
with OpenVAF.

Benchmark Setup: Simulation of HBT output characteristics using HICUM/L2 model shown in the examples.
The collector and base voltage step width is set to 1 mV, increasing the simulation time significantly.

*Benchmark results (in seconds, less is better):*

* **Ngspice (OpenVAF): 9.16s**
* Ngspice (built-in): 14.64s
* Xyce (ADMS): 36.42s
* Xyce (built-in): 26.56s
* ADS (Verilog-A): 8.63s
* ADS (built-in): 7.01s


Notes:

* The OpenVAF compiled model runs faster than the built-in Ngspice HICUM/L2 model as this particular built-in implementation uses slow dual-number based derivatives
* Xyce evaluation time is very likely larger due to difference in convergence algorithms, and not inherently due to Xyce itself.


<!--**=> Both Xyce and ADS run slower with Verilog-A model.**

**=> Ngspice runs comparably fast as commercial ADS simulator.**-->


<!-- ### HICUM/L2v2p4p0 Transient Simulation

Benchmark: Simulation of HBT transient behavior with 1 GHz input signal at the base node and fixed ultra short time step.

* **Ngspice (OpenVAF): 50.05s**
* Ngspice (built-in): 82.39s
* Xyce (ADMS): 56s
* ADS (Verilog-A): 1000.4s
* ADS (built-in): 930.9s

TODO: Ich glaube ADS macht hier VIEL mehr timesteps, das kann so nicht stimmen
Note: As mentinoed above comparisons  -->

### BSIMSOI 4.4.0 Output Characteristics (builtin vs OpenVAF)

The BSIMSOI model is available as a hardcoded model inside Ngspice that has been around for a long time.
The derivatives are all handwritten and haven been manually optimized over many years.
Therefore, comparing OpenVAF to this handwritten version allows direct comparison.

Benchmark Setup: Simulation of MOSFET output characteristics with very fine bias steps.

*Benchmark results (in seconds, less is better):*
<!-- Note: Use of BSIMSOI v4.5.0 in Xyce -->

* **Ngspice (OpenVAF): 8.47s**
* Ngspice (built-in): 7.98s

 => OpenVAF models are only 6% slower than carefully optimized handwritten code.

<!--
* Xyce (ADMS): 42.9s
* ADS (Verilog-A): 430.4s
* ADS (built-in): 408.4s -->

### BSIMBULK 106.2 Output Characteristics (ADMS vs OpenVAF)


The BSIMBULK model is not available in Ngspice by default.
However, an experimental Verilog-A file that was adjusted for compilation with ADMS is available
which allows a good comparison between ADMS based simulations and OpenVAF based simulations with Ngspice.

Benchmark Setup: Simulation of MOSFET output characteristics with very fine bias steps.

*Benchmark results (in seconds, less is better):*

* **Ngspice (OpenVAF): 2.08s**
* Ngspice (ADMS): 3.38s
<!--* ADS (Verilog-A): 79.63s
* ADS (built-in): 76.87s
-->

Benchmark Setup: Simulation of MOSFET transient characteristics with very fine fixed time steps.

*Benchmark results (in seconds, less is better):*

* **Ngspice (OpenVAF): 9.47s**
* Ngspice (ADMS): 13.70s

<!-- * ADS (Verilog-A): 74.9s
* ADS (built-in): 74.5s -->

 => OpenVAF based simulations are between **40% and 100% faster** than ADMS based simulations in Ngspice


### PSP 103.8 Inverter 

This benchmark demonstrates a use-case that is closer to real-world usage.
Note that the performance difference here is smaller in relative terms
as more time is spent on other tasks such as matrix factorization.

Benchmark: Transient simulation of the inverter from the examples' section using a very fine bias grid.

*Benchmark results (in seconds, less is better):*
* **Ngspice (OpenVAF): 20.01s**
* Ngspice (ADMS): 25.07s

=> OpenVAF provides a 20% speedup compared to ADMS in realistic transient simulations

### ISCAS Benchmark Circuit with PSP 103.8 

Benchmark: Transient simulation of the ISCAS benchmark circuit from the examples' section using a very fine bias grid. 
Note that Ngspice has been built with openmp for this example to enable parallelization.

*Benchmark results (in seconds, less is better):*
* **Ngspice (OpenVAF): 20min**
* Ngspice (ADMS): 25min

=> OpenVAF provides a 20% speedup compared to ADMS in realistic transient simulations
